==========================
Building networks: neurons
==========================


Cell types
==========

In PyNN, the system of equations that defines a neuronal model is encapsulated
in a :class:`CellType` class. PyNN provides a library of "standard" cell types
(see :doc:`standardmodels`) which work the same across all backend simulators -
an example is the :class:`IF_cond_exp` model - an integrate-and-fire (I&F)
neuron with conductance-based, exponential-decay synapses.
For any given simulator, it is also possible to wrap a native model - a NEST or
NEURON model, for example - in a :class:`CellType` class so that it works in
PyNN (see :doc:`nonstandardmodels`).

It should be noted that these "cell types" are *mathematical* cell types. Two or
more different *biological* cell types may be represented by the same
mathematical cell type, but with different parameterizations. For example, in
the thalamocortical model of Destexhe (200?), thalamocortical relay neurons and
cortical neurons are both modelled with the adaptive exponential I&F neuron
model (AdExp)::

    >>> thalamocortical_type = EIF_cond_exp_isfa_ista({...})
    >>> cortical_type = EIF_cond_exp_isfa_ista({...})

.. todo: check details + parameters of Destexhe model

(see :doc:`parameters` for more on specifying parameter values). To see the list
of parameter names for a given cell type, use the :meth:`get_parameter_names()`
method::

    >>> IF_cond_exp.get_parameter_names()
    [....]
    
while the default values for the parameters are in the :attr:`default_values`
attribute::

    >>> IF_cond_exp.default_values
    {...}

Note that what we have created here are *neuron type* objects. These can be
regarded as templates, from which we will construct the actual neurons in our
network.


Populations
===========

Since PyNN is designed for modelling networks containing many neurons,
the default level of abstraction in PyNN is not the single neuron but a
population of neurons of a given type, represented by the :class:`Population`
class::

    >>> tc_cells = Population(1000, thalamocortical_type)
    >>> ctx_cells = Population(5000, cortical_type)

To create a :class:`Population`, we need to specify at minimum the number of
neurons and the cell type. Three additional arguments may optionally be
specified:
    * the spatial structure of the population;
    * initial values for the neuron state variables;
    * a label.

::

    >>> from pyNN.space import Grid2D, RandomStructure, Sphere
    >>> tc_cells = Population(1000, thalamocortical_type,
    ...                       structure=RandomStructure(boundary=Sphere(radius=200.0)))
    ...                       initial_values={'v': -70.0},
    ...                       label="Thalamocortical neurons")
    >>> from pyNN.random import RandomDistribution
    >>> v_init = RandomDistribution('uniform', (-70.0, -60.0))
    >>> ctx_cells = Population(5000, cortical_type,
    ...                        structure=Grid2D(dx=10.0, dy=10.0),
    ...                        initial_values={'v': v_init},
    ...                        label="Cortical neurons")
    
(see :doc:`space` for more detail on spatial structure and :doc:`parameters` for
more on specifying initial values.)


Views
=====

It is common to work with only a subset of the neurons in a :class:`Population`
- to modify their parameters, make connections or record from them. Any subset
of neurons in a population may be addressed using the usual Python indexing
and slicing notation, for example::

    >>> ctx_cells[457]   # the 458th neuron in a Population
    >>> ctx_cells[:100]  # the first hundred neurons
    >>> ctx_cells[::2]   # every second neuron
    >>> ctx_cells[45, 91, 3459]  # a specific set of neurons

It is also possible to address a random sample of neurons within a population
using the :meth:`sample()` method::

    >>> ctx_cells.sample(100)  # select 100 neurons at random

In the first of these examples, the object that is returned is an :class:`ID`
object, representing a single neuron. :class:`ID` objects are discussed below.

In all of these examples except the first, the object that is returned is a
:class:`PopulationView`. A ``PopulationView`` holds references to a subset of
neurons in a ``Population``, which means that any changes in the view are also
reflected in the real population (and vice versa).

:class:`PopulationView` objects behave in most ways as real :class:`Population`
objects, notably, they can be used in a :class:`Projection` (see
:doc:`connections`) and combined with other :class:`Population` or
:class:`PopulationView` objects to create an :class:`Assembly`.


Assemblies
==========

As discussed above, a :class:`Population` is a homogeneous collection of
neurons, in the sense that all neurons have the same cell type. An
:class:`Assembly` is an aggregate of :class:`Population` and
:class:`PopulationView` objects, and as such can represent a heterogeneous
collection of neurons, of multiple cell types.

An :class:`Assembly` can be created by adding together :class:`Population` and
:class:`PopulationView` objects::

    >>> all_cells = tc_cells + ctx_cells
    >>> cells_for_plotting = tc_cells[:100] + ctx_cells[:500]
    
or by using the :class:`Assembly` constructor::

    >>> all_cells = Assembly(tc_cells, ctx_cells)

An assembly behaves in most ways like a :class:`Population`, e.g. for setting
and retrieving parameters, specifying which neurons to record from, etc. It can
also be specified as the source or target of a :class:`Projection`. In this
case, all the neurons in the component populations are treated as identical for
the purposes of the connection algorithm (note that if the synapse type is
specified (with the :attr:`target` argument), an Exception will be raised if not
all component neuron types possess that synapse type).

Individual populations within an :class:`Assembly` may be accessed via their
labels, e.g.::

    >>> all_cells.get_population("tc_cells")

Iterating over an assembly returns individual IDs, ordered by population.
Similarly, the :attr:`size` attribute of an :class:`Assembly` gives the total
number of neurons it contains. To iterate over or count populations, use the
:attr:`populations` attribute::

    >>> for p in all_cells.populations:
    ...    print p.label, p.size, p.celltype
    Thalamocortical neurons 1000 EIF_cond_exp_isfa_ista
    Cortical neurons 5000 EIF_cond_exp_isfa_ista


Inspecting and modifying parameter values and initial conditions
================================================================

Although both parameter values and initial conditions may be specified when
creating a :class:`Population` (and this is generally the most efficient place
to do it), it is also possible to modify them later.

The :meth:`get()` method of :class:`Population`, :class:`PopulationView` and
:class:`Assembly` returns the current value(s) of one or more parameters::

    >>> ctx_cells.get('tau_m')
    20.0
    >>> all_cells.get('v_reset')
    70.6

If the parameter is homogeneous across the group, a single number will be
returned, otherwise :meth:`get()` will return a NumPy array containing the
parameter values for all neurons::

    >>> ctx_cells[:5].get('tau_refrac')
    LIST OF RANDOM NUMBERS HERE

It is also possible to ask for multiple parameters at once, in which case a
:class:`dict` will be returned.

    >>> ctx_cells.get(['tau_m', 'cm'])
    {'tau_m': 20.0, 'cm': 1.0}

When running a distributed simulation using MPI_, :meth:`get()` will by default
return values for only those neurons that exist on the current MPI node. To get
the values for all neurons, use ``get(parameter_name, gather=True)``.

To modify parameter values, use the :class:`set()` method. To set the same
value for all neurons, pass a single number as the parameter value::

    >>> ctx_cells.set(a=2.0, b=0.2)
    
To set different values for different neurons there are several options - see
:doc:`parameters` for more details.

To modify the initial values of model variables, use the :meth:`initialize()`
method::

    >>> ctx_cells.initialize(v=RandomDistribution('normal', (-65.0, 2.0)),
    ...                      w=0.0)

The default initial values may be inspected as follows::

    >>> ctx_cells.celltype.default_initial_values
    {....}


Injecting current into neurons
==============================

Static or time-varying currents may be injected into neurons using either the
:meth:`inject_into()` method of the :class:`CurrentSource`::

    >>> pulse = DCSource(amplitude=0.5, start=20.0, stop=80.0)
    >>> pulse.inject_into(thalamocortical_neurons)

or the :meth:`inject()` method of the :class:`Population`,
:class:`PopulationView` or :class:`Assembly`::

    >>> import numpy
    >>> times = numpy.arange(0.0, 100.0, 1.0)
    >>> amplitudes = 0.1*numpy.sin(times*numpy.pi/100.0)
    >>> sine_wave = StepCurrentSource(times, amplitudes)
    >>> cortical_neurons[800:900].inject(sine_wave)

See :doc:`currentsources` for more about injecting currents.
    
    
Recording variables and retrieving recorded data
================================================

Just as each cell type has a well-defined set of parameters (whose values are
constant over time), so it has a well-defined set of state variables, such as
the membrane potential, whose values change over the course of a simulation. The
:attr:`recordable` attribute of a :class:`CellType` class contains a list of
these variables, as well as the 'spikes' variable, which is used to record
the times of action potentials::

    >>> ctx_cells.celltype.recordable
    ['spikes', 'v', 'w', 'gsyn_exc', 'gsyn_inh']
    
The :meth:`record()` method specifies which variables should be recorded::

    >>> all_cells.record('spikes')
    >>> ctx_cells.sample(100).record(('v', 'w'), sampling_interval=0.2)

Note that the sampling interval must be an integer multiple of the simulation
time step (except for simulators which allow use of variable time-step
integration methods).

.. todo: discuss specifying filename in record()

At the end of a simulation, the recorded data can be retrieved using the
:meth:`get_data()` method::

    >>> data_block = all_cells.get_data()
    
or written to file using :meth:`write_data()`::

    >>> from neo.io import HDF5IO
    >>> h5file = HDF5IO("my_data.h5")
    >>> ctx_cells.write_data(h5file)

:meth:`get_data()` returns a Neo_ :class:`Block` object. For more information on
Neo see the documentation at http://packages.python.org/neo. Here, it will
suffice to note that a :class:`Block` is the top-level container, and contains
one or more :class:`Segments`. Each :class:`Segment` is a container for data
that share a common time basis, and can contain lists of :class:`AnalogSignal`,
:class:`AnalogSignalArray` and :class:`SpikeTrain` objects. These data objects
inherit from NumPy array, and so can be treated in further processing (analysis,
visualization, etc.) in exactly the same way as plain arrays, but in addition
they carry metadata about units, sampling interval, etc.

:meth:`write_data()` also makes use of Neo, and allows writing to any of the
several output file formats supported by Neo. Note that as a short-cut, you can
just give a filename to :meth:`write_data()`; the output format will then be
determined based on the filename extension ('.h5' for HDF5, '.txt' for ASCII,
etc.) if possible, otherwise the default file format (determined by the value of
``pyNN.recording.DEFAULT_FILE_FORMAT``) will be used.

For more details, see :doc:`data_handling`.


Working with individual neurons
===============================

Although it is usually more convenient and more efficient to work with
populations of neurons, it is occasionally convienient to work with individual
neurons, represented as an :class:`ID` object::

    >>> tc_cells[479]
    5480
    
For the simulator backends shipped with PyNN, the :class:`ID` class is a
subclass of :class:`int`, and in the case of NEURON and NEST matches the global
ID (gid) used internally by the simulator. There is no requirement that IDs be
integers, however, nor that they have the same value across different
simulators.

The :attr:`parent` attribute contains a reference to the parent
:class:`population`::

    >>> a_cell = tc_cells[479]
    >>> a_cell.parent.label
    Thalamocortical neurons

To recover the index of a neuron within its parent given the :class:`ID`, use
:meth:`Population.id_to_index()`, e.g.::

    >>> tc_cells.id_to_index(a_cell)
    479

The ``ID`` object allows direct access to the parameters of individual neurons, e.g.::

    >>> a_cell.tau_m
    10.0

To change several parameters at once for a single neuron, use the
:meth:`set_parameters()` method::

    >>> a_cell.set_parameters(tau_m=10.0, cm=0.5)
    >>> a_cell.tau_m
    10.0
    >>> a_cell.cm
    0.5


.. _MPI: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface
.. _Neo: http://neuralensemble.org/neo